Hello everybody. Very great to be back with all of you and Keisha, thank you for your friendship and Eric yours as well. And you’re both been doing a heck of a job. Look, I want to thank everything you’re doing and for the faith you’ve placed in may so early on, but look, I’ve had the privilege of speaking to this body many, many times over the years from the time I was a senator and as Vice President, and I’ve always had enormous respect for just how tough your jobs are. I’m not being solicitous. I used to be a county councilman in Delaware. I only ran for the United States Senate because I realized how hard local office is. I kiddingly say that I did it because, I ran for the Senate because it was easier.There is no reason, none, why we can’t work together, we can’t work together again to overcome these challenges. You all know the House passed the Heroes Act, which should provide $915 billion in local and state government. It’s collecting dust right now on the Senate. Majority leader who I know well says, “Let the states go bankrupt.” [inaudible 00:10:58] having a local emergency fund that drives resources straight to you, expand your health infrastructure, reimburses overtime pay for the essential workers and first responders. Whatever your community needs the most, it isn’t all about resources though.The time when people are crying out for justice, exercising the right to peacefully protest, it’s falling on you to keep the peace and god, it’s a tough job on any circumstances. It’s nearly impossible where the president scapegoats his mayors and fans the flame of division. We can work together to build trust and accountability between police and communities, to condemn all violence, while still addressing the pain and injustice that they’re feeling and rooting out systemic racism. And as you all deal with the effects of extreme weather, fires, floods, superstorms where it’s like we’ve never seen.We can work together to invest in our communities to make them more resilient to climate change. The problems are different in every… Some places it’s about flooding, some places it’s about being wiped out by storms along the coast where I live. Sometimes it’s about being safe, just keeping people safe from fires, but it also is about being able to create millions of jobs, modernizing your buildings and your transportation system, making your community stronger, greener, better position to seize the opportunities in the years ahead. That’s what I plan on doing to get to you. That’s what we did when I was vice-president. That’s what we’ll do if I have the honor of becoming your president.What we can’t do though, is divide ourselves into pieces. That’s the only strategy this president seems to know, but it doesn’t work. It can distract you from a problem. It can create a new problem that occupy your attention, but it can’t actually solve anything. You all know better than anyone, dividing ourselves gets us nowhere. We have to work together in good faith, competently, efficiently leading with the facts. We can disagree on policies but we have to cooperate. It’s only the way we’re going to come out of these crises and ensure that our best days are still ahead, which I firmly believe they are.That’s what we’ve done, tried to do in this campaign and that’s what I’ll do as president. Work with all of you. Democrats, Republicans, independents. As I said, if I’m elected president, I’m not going to be a democratic president, I’m going to be an American president. Blue cities, red cities it does not matter to me. I promise you. Every American community deserves the full support of an American president.Look, being a mayor and you know I’m not kidding about this, is hard under the best of circumstances, but the worst thing a president can do is to drive wedges and make your job tougher because he thinks it benefits him or stirs up chaos in your communities. You deserve a partner who’ll listen to you, who’ll work with you, work on your priorities. Someone who gets your back and saves your back, works to cover your back no matter what you are and no matter what challenge you’re facing.This moment we’re facing now, isn’t a partisan moment. It’s an American moment. It sounds corny, doesn’t it? But it’s true, it’s an American moment. It’s a chance for us to overcome anger and division that has hold us back of late for far too long. We can emerge from these crises. We can do what we’re best at doing, unite, work together. And it starts with the mayors. And I really mean that. It starts with all of you. I promise you. If I’m elected, you will have direct access to the White House. I want to thank you all because we need you to build back better. You are the foundation stone, not a joke. You’re the ones leading away. And what people don’t realize is over the last six years more young people are moving into cities than out of cities.There’s so many possibilities. We got to stop the hate and the division now, we got to stop pouring flames on the fire, we got to start talking straight to the American people. That’s what you all do. You do it every day. I want to make it clear to you, I’ve never been more optimistic and I’ve been doing this a long time about the prospects for this country than I am today. The blinders have been taken off the American people. They understand what’s going on now. They understand. They understand it’s about all of us. They want to get things done. And so it’s going to start with you. I promise you I’ll have your back. I mean that sincerely. Look in my record, I have, and I want to make sure that your ideas are the ones that are funneled up. They don’t have to go through a state legislature, go through a governor. They can go straight to the federal government, straight to me. I really mean it. So God bless you. May God protect our troops and thank you for what you do. Your job is too hard for me.But the quality of people’s lives is so much more in your hands and on your shoulders than anyone else. Making sure people feel safe walking down the street, making sure the garbage gets collected, making sure the schools are safe and open. All the concrete things that make everyday life or break everyday life. They’re not partisan things. They’re just practical things. People look to you, Democrats and Republicans. You’re also on the front lines of emergencies. From fires to floods, to school shootings, to public health issues, helping save lives as well as livelihoods. That’s why I’ve made it a priority of my entire career to work closely with you.

From the time I got to the senate 180 years ago, as well as my tenure, as vice president. You know, if I have the honor of becoming your president, I make this commitment to you. You’re going to have an access directly to the White House. I’m going to be right there with you, helping you and your communities based on what you think you need and the challenge you’re facing because the president, the mayor pointed out that it is about all from the bottom up. It doesn’t go from the top down. We’re dealing with four historic crises all at once. A once in a century pandemic that has claimed over 200,000 American lives, a devastating economic recession, a long overdue reckoning on racial justice and a change in climate that’s ravaging communities all across the country.I need not tell that to Eric and the mayors in California and Oregon and Washington state. Not one of those crises should have a partisan dimension. I really mean that. Not one single one. If I get elected president, I’m not going to be the Democratic president, I’m going to be an American president. Whether you voted for me or against me, whether your city is red or blue, I’m going to be there. I promise you. Frankly, we should be able to address each one of these the same way mayors solve problems, by leading with the facts and with reality, putting the wellbeing of our constituents first, uniting people around solutions that work for everybody, but tragically, that isn’t how this current administration is wired.The only problems that matter to this president seem to be problems that affect him personally. He defines everything in a red and blue, blue states, red states, Democratic cities, Republican cities. I think that’s explains why one day before we hit 200,000 deaths, the president held a campaign rally and insisted that the virus was, “Affects virtually nobody.” Then he went on to say, “except elderly people with heart conditions and problems.” Ask the folks in their communities how they feel about that. Their parents that are being referred to by the president as nobodies. Ask their families of that empty seat at kitchen table this morning, if that’s true they’re nobodies. Kids who lost their teachers. Parents, and grandparents, friends or coworkers, sisters or brothers, never going to see again.The problems we’re facing affects all of us, every one of us in every community. I think this may be the toughest time in a long time to be a mayor, especially a big city mayor, but that’s not true across the board. Mayors have faced adversity before. Some of you remember back in 2008, the economy was in free fall. We were losing 700,000 jobs a month because of the recession we inherited. Families lost, and I know you remember this, families lost more than $16 trillion, families, in personal wealth. People who had never missed a mortgage payment, all of a sudden were underwater, being foreclosed on because of the number of foreclosures that occurred on their streets significantly reducing the value of their home.

Was devastated. We didn’t solve it by saying, “You’re on your own. It’s what it is.” We came together. With your leadership, we passed and implemented the Recovery Act. We provided $140 billion in state and local fiscal relief, keeping law enforcement and firefighters on the job. We sent more than $50 billion to your school districts saving more than 300,000 education jobs. We provided the Middle Class Tax Relief, helping families send their kids to college, to buy their first home. We invested in the future. We put $48 billion in infrastructure projects building 42,000 miles of roads, nearly 27,000 bridges to go along with the biggest clean energy investment in all of our history, creating hundreds of thousands of jobs.And I said then and I say again, you should be able to make the decisions of what your city most needs. It shouldn’t have to go through your state legislatures all the time. You should have an opportunity. Even conservative economist acknowledge that what we did saved us from a depression. When the president gave me the honor of leading the recovery effort, first thing I did, I went to the mayors. Some of you were still around then. I spoke with over 200 mayors. Because of you, we came through the moment together. I really mean it. I spoke on the phone constantly. That’s the same approach we should be taking today.It starts with your budgets. You have to balance your budgets. You’re getting squeezed like never before. Local services are getting pared back, municipal jobs are falling by the wayside, furloughs and layoffs, compounding the devastation. We still have no effective of national standard for curbing the virus, which is infuriating because scientists insist we can save 110,000… They expect close to 200,000 more lives to be lost between now and January. They insist we can save 110,000 by the end of the year by simply wearing masks, and that’s straightening your budget even more because it keeps businesses from opening, opening back up. It keeps emergency rooms full and holds down your cities from springing back to life.the Affordable Care Act in its entirety, wipe it out, taking us back to a time when insurance companies could deny you coverage for preexisting conditions. Now, because of COVID, lung scarring or heart problems is a consequence of having survived COVID. That could be the next pre-existing conditions affecting millions of people. Taking away Medicare benefits for seniors. Throw your adult kids off your healthcare insurance.He hasn’t pulled Congress together to provide real relief for working people, moms, and dads, and business owners. The fact is Congress has passed a significant recovery bill, but he’s too busy being in a bunker, or in his golf course to call them into the White House to work out an agreement. He told FEMA to cut off funding for school PPE, masks, and protective gear, because it’s not a national emergency. His response during the deadly pandemic is to try to take your healthcare away by asking the Supreme Court to strike the Affordable Care Act in its entirety. Wipe it out.And you said it to me, he said, “Don’t move. Don’t sell your house because no Ohio factory will shut down in Donald Trump’s America.” He doesn’t pay his fair share, don’t worry about that. He doesn’t pay his fair share in taxes. He says that makes him smart. What does that do? What does that make you, Tiffany, make me, and millions of other hard working Americans, decent people who pay our taxes? Are we the suckers? Are we stupid because we go by the rules? He’s too weak to beat the pandemic. Cost him more than 200,000 American lives. That’s upended every part of our lives and hit working people particularly hard. Your businesses are closed and schools aren’t back to normal because Donald Trump hasn’t done his job.The fact is that I think that when he called our military, and I see we got some veterans here too, thank you for your service man, but when he called our veterans who lost their lives and served suckers and losers, I thought it was one of the most despicable things that I’ve ever heard a President say. Guys you are soldiers or a veteran, you served your country, like you did, like you did Connor, like my son did. What he does, he lies to you. He lies to you about exactly what’s happened. Does he lie to you when, like this president did to your husband, that all the workers at GM plant in Lordstown were going to be in good shape. You remember what he said?The fact is that last night’s debate, and this election, is supposed to be about you, Tiffany, about you and all the people I grew up with in Scranton, and people in Youngstown, and Claymont, Delaware, and all the people who make a difference. Does any President, does your President understand at all what you’re going through, what so many other people are going through? Question is does he see you where you are and where you want to be? Does he care? As he tried to walk in your shoes, to understand what’s going on in your life? Or does he just ignore you and all the folks all over America who are in a similar situation? I think he’s more than ignoring us. I look at things from Scranton’s perspective, he looks at from Park Avenue. I think he basically looks down on us. He judges us.I want to start off by saying that it’s great to be in Ohio and with my so many friends, members of Congress, local elected officials. It’s an honor to be here with Tiffany. I know how hard it is for her. And I say I know, I was in the position of her children. My dad went through the same thing, Mr. Mayor. Back in Scranton, Pennsylvania, he lost his job. And I remember him walking up the stairs, making what I call that longest walk a parent has to make to tell a child that he’s going to have to leave. My dad didn’t have an eight hour ride. He only had a three hour ride, three and a half hour ride. He moved to Wilmington, Delaware. Took a couple of years before he could bring us back down to Delaware, come home every weekend, but to make sure that we’re all together again. It’s a hard slog. A lot of people have made that. And Tiffany, you’re a wonderful, wonderful mother, teacher, and the way you talk about your husband, he and I have something in common. We both married way up. I want to say that my dad, when he was, I apologize to Congressman Lamb, he’s heard me say this a lot, but my dad, when we moved back to Delaware, moved to Delaware, would say all the time to his children, my siblings and I, he’d say, “Joey, a job’s about a lot more than a paycheck. It’s about your dignity. It’s about respect. It’s about being able to hold your head up. It’s being able to look your child in the eye and say, it’s going to be okay. That’s what a job is about.” And Tiffany, when I think about your husband taking that job eight hours away, although it’s a hundred years ago, I think about my dad, and I imagine your husband has the same stamina, and you do, as my mom and dad did.Hey everybody. I have to tell y’all, it’s great to see you.Hello Cleveland. Don’t jump. Folks, I was reminiscing as we drove to the station, I spent the bulk of my adult life driving to an Amtrak station. I commuted every day from Wilmington, Delaware to Washington DC when I got elected as a young Senator, right after my wife and daughter were killed, and I didn’t plan on staying in the Senate, but I agreed I’d stay for six months, a long time ago, and I started commuting and the fact is they tell me I’ve logged more than 2,100,000 miles on Amtrak. So it’s good to be here. It’s not as fast as the helicopter, but I made a lot of family and friends on Amtrak. So I’m looking forward to getting on the train with you guys.I’ll fight for American jobs with the dignity of work and make the wealthy and corporations began to pay their fair share. I’ll protect your right to healthcare and build on and improve the Affordable Care Act and I’ll always tell you the truth. I’ll always care about you, whether you vote for me or not. If elected, I’m not going to be a Democratic president, I’m going to be an American president. Whether you voted for me or not, I’m going to be your president and I’ll never forget the people, the working people of this country, because that’s what I’ve come from. That, given just half a chance, the American people can do anything. Just like you, Tiffany, and your husband, you’ve stood up. You can do anything. I want to make something absolutely clear. There’s overwhelming reason for optimism. Reverend, as you said, there’s overwhelming reason. We just have to unite. The country is ready to do that. We’re better positioned than any nation in the world to own the 21st century, we just have to do it and do it together. So I leave you Rev and thank you for your invocation by saying, God bless you all and may God protect our troops. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Keep the faith. We’re coming back. Thank you.Talking to folks about how I’d create good paying jobs, union jobs, to support working families and build our economy back. Not just back, but build it back better. I’ll protect your Medicare and social security and how I’ll fight to protect pensions, including fixing [inaudible 00:31:13] employer pensions so that many union women and men in Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Iowa, Minnesota, Delaware, all across this country, are able to keep what they earned and deserve.Folks, this election has a choice between Scranton and Park Avenue values, between Cleveland and Park Avenue values, between Alliance and Park Avenue values. But it’s also about something deeper. Can these parents look their kids in the eye and say, ” Honey, everything’s going to be okay.” These are the conversations I’m going to be having today in this whistle stop tour through Ohio and Pennsylvania, talking to folks about how I’ll get the virus under control, lay out the plan, bringing Congress together to provide relief and resources to schools and business so we can reopen our economy safely and strongly with a real plan and real leadership.For 36 years, I said, I took that 250 mile round trip journey each day. I’d get to know the train engineers, the conductors, the fellow passengers, and at night, I’d see the pinpoints of lights in the homes in the cities and towns along the way from Washington to Wilmington and wonder what those families are talking about after they put their kids to bed. My guess is the same thing that all Americans across the country are talking about today, asking questions as profound and as ordinary as, will we be okay? Will we be able to keep our insurance? What are we going to do?Well, I never will forget. I know the middle class working people built this country and I measure our economic success by what families are talking about around their kitchen tables this morning. Some of them with an empty chair because they lost a family member. The ones I saw every night on my train ride from Washington to Wilmington, Delaware, as I said after my wife and daughter were killed when I was first elected, I started going home every single night so I’d be there in the morning to get my kids, Beau Hunter and Ashley ready for school. Actually, Jill, God love her, she came into our life five years later and made things good.That’s the commuter. All right. But folks, look, he let big corporation jump in front of the line to get the recovery aid that Congress had passed while small businesses are struggling to say open. In the end, his measure of economic health is the stock market. In four years as president, he’s broken his promise, he’s forgotten the forgotten Americans he said he was always going to fight for.Think about his plan for your social security. The social security actuary said that if he follows through on his plan for social security, social security will be quote, “Bankrupt by 2023.” It clear that he not only cares about Wall Street and the super wealthy and the Fortune 500, he thinks they built this country. That’s why he wants another $30 billion tax cut for the hundred wealthiest billionaires in the country, who have already made $ 30 billion during this pandemic. So they’ll pay a lower tax rate than you do as a teacher, a factory worker, a firefighter, a nurse. He gave a tax giveaway for corporations and they moved jobs overseas to sell goods back to the United States. Here comes the train that he tried to make sure didn’t continue to run.The Senate has to stand strong for our democracy. They must not act on this nomination until the American people finish the process they’re already begun, of selecting their president and their Congress. And I’ve said before, if the people choose Donald Trump, then the Senate should give his nominee a hearing and a vote. If the people do not choose Trump and choose me, President Trump’s nomination should be withdrawn. I should nominate… chosen by a president who’s just been elected by the people… to get a fair hearing, which would not even occur until early February… a confirmation vote.The US Constitution provides one chance, one, for the Americans to have their voices heard on who serves a lifetime appointment on the Supreme Court, who makes those big decisions about their healthcare, their civil rights, and much else. That chance is now. That moment is now. And the voters, in my view, are not going to stand for this abuse of power. And, if we’re to call ourselves a democracy, their voices must be heard.I urge the American people to keep voting and to let your current senators know that you want to be heard before a vote on confirmation of a new justice. And I urge every senator to take a step back from the brink, take off the blinders on politics for just one critical moment, and stand up for the Constitution you swore to uphold. This is a time to de-escalate, to put an end to the shattering of precedents that has thrown our nation into chaos under this president.Just because you have the power to do something doesn’t absolve you of your responsibility to do right by the American people. Uphold your Constitutional duty. Summon your conscience. Stand up for the people. Stand up for our cherished system of checks and balances. Americans are watching. Americans are voting. We must listen to them now. We must allow them to exercise this sacred power. So please listen. Thank you, and God bless America. May God protect our troops. And I’ll take a few questions. Yes, sir.They should see to it that the American public will vote on the Senate races in this election, and they’ll vote Republicans out of office. That’s the consequence. That’s the focus. That’s why I want to make it clear and stay on message here. The clear focus is this is about your healthcare. This is about whether or not the ACA will exist. This is about whether or not pre-existing conditions will continue to be covered. This is about whether or not a woman can be charged more for the same procedure as a man. This is about people’s healthcare in the middle of a pandemic. Yes?No, I have not. I concluded that that would put them in a position, if they were to vote the right way, that they’d be compromised because I called them. But I know I have great respect for a number of my Republican colleagues, my former Republican colleagues. And I’m hoping they will do the right thing.I am not… And I know you’re going to be upset with my answer. But what I’m not going to do is play the Trump game, which is a good game he plays. Take your eye off the issue before us. If I were to say yes or no to that, that becomes a big issue. That’s the headline here. I am focused on one thing right now, and I really mean it. I’m focused on making sure the American people understand that they’re being cut out of this process they’re entitled to be part, and the cutout is designed in order to take away the ACA and your health care in the midst of a pandemic. That’s the focus. That’s what it’s on. And that’s the deal. Thank you all so very, very much. Thank you.Shortly before Justice Ginsburg passed, she told her granddaughter, and I quote, “My most fervent wish is that I will not be replaced until a new president is installed.” End of quote. It wasn’t a personal request. It wasn’t a favor being asked for. It was the last act of a long, unflinching career of standing up for American democracy. Never before in our nation’s history has a Supreme Court justice been nominated and installed while a presidential election is already underway. It defies every precedent, every expectation of a nation where the people, the people, are sovereign and the rule of law reigns.But yesterday, before justice Ginsburg could be laid to rest and after a hundred thousands of Americans had already cast their ballots, the president nominated a successor to her seat. It’s no mystery about what’s happening here. President Trump is trying to throw out the Affordable Care Act. He’s been trying to do it for the last four years. The Republican party has been trying to eliminate it for a decade. Twice, already, the Supreme Court has upheld that law, the Affordable Care Act. And the Congress, expressing the popular will of the American people, has rejected President Trump’s efforts, as well.Now, all of a sudden, this administration believes they found a loophole in the tragedy of Justice Ginsburg’s death. It doesn’t matter to them the Republicans set the precedent just four years ago, when they denied even the courtesy of a hearing to President Obama’s nominee after Justice Scalia passed, after he had only passed away nine the months prior to election day. Didn’t matter to them that millions of Americans already voting on a new president and a new Congress had begun.All that does matter is that they see an opportunity to overturn the Affordable Care Act on their way out the door. And as I speak, we are still in the midst of the worst global health crisis in a century, a crisis that has already taken over 200,000 lives, between 750 and 1,000 lives a day and counting. And yet, the Trump administration is asking the Supreme Court right now, as I speak, to eliminate the entire Affordable Care Act. The administration filed a brief in the Supreme Court that concludes, and I quote, “The entire ACA, thus, must fall. The entire ACA, thus, must fall.”President Trump can claim all he wants that he’s going to protect people with pre-existing conditions. But the fact is he’s already fighting to take those protections away as we speak. If he has his way, more than 100 million people with pre-existing conditions like asthma, diabetes, and cancer could once again be denied coverage. Complications from COVID-19 like lung scarring and heart damage could become the next flood of pre-existing conditions used as an excuse to deny coverage to millions of people. Women could once again be charged higher premiums just because they are women. Pregnancy becoming a pre-existing condition, again. Seniors would see their prescription drug prices go up and the funding for Medicare go down.It doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter what the American people want. President Trump sees a chance to fulfill his explicit mission: steal away the vital protections of the ACA from countless families who’ve come to rely on them for their health, their financial security, and the lives of those they love. President Trump just tweeted an hour ago, on my way here, and I quote, “Obamacare will be replaced with a much better and far cheaper alternative. If it is terminated in the Supreme Court, it would be a big win for the USA.” Should come as no surprise.And then, Saturday, President Trump would nominate Judge Amy Coney Barrett and, on Sunday, lay out clearly what his objective is: to terminate Obamacare. The judge has a written track record, a written track record of disagreeing adamantly with the Supreme Court’s decisions on two occasions upholding the ACA. In fact, not as a judge, but prior to going on the bench, she publicly criticized Chief Justice Roberts’ opinion upholding the law eight years ago.The American people understand the urgency of this moment. They’re already voting in droves because they know their healthcare hangs in the balance. They understand that, if Donald Trump gets his way, they could lose their right to vote, their right to clean air and water, their right to equal pay for equal work. Workers could lose their collective bargaining rights. Dreamers could be thrown out of the only country they’ve ever known. And women could lose the bedrock rights enshrined in Roe v. Wade for 50 years. People are voting right now because they know the very soul of this country is at stake and because they know that the decisions of the Supreme Court affect their everyday lives.Their voices may not matter to Donald Trump. They may not matter to Mitch McConnell. But there are Senate Republicans out there who know, in their hearts, that if they shut out the voices of those during a voting period, during an election, they’re closing the door on American democracy thereafter. This is where the power of the nation resides, in the people, in the rule of law, in precedents we abide by. To subvert both, openly and needlessly, even as Americans cast their vote, would be an irreversible step toward the brink and a betrayal of a single quality that America has borne and built on. The people decide.I had the honor of paying respects to Justice Ginsburg and her family. First woman, first woman in history of our nation to lie in state in the US Capitol. And though it should not have taken nearly this long to bestow that honor on a woman, it nevertheless speaks to the unique and powerful impact Justice Ginsburg has made in our society and her enduring legacy of equal rights and equal justice under the law.Folks, thanks for taking the time to be here today. I really appreciate it. And we even have an astronaut in our house and I tell you what, that’s pretty cool. Look, first of all, I want to thank Chris and the mayor for being here, and all of you for being here. You know, these are tough times. Over 200,000 Americans have passed away. Over 200,000, and the number is still rising. The impact on communities is bad across the board, but particularly bad for African-American communities. Almost four times as likely, three times as likely to catch the disease, COVID, and when it’s caught, twice as likely to die as white Americans. It’s sort of emblematic of the inequality that exists and the circumstances that exist.And then we’re going to talk about, I think a big issue here is access to apprenticeships and access to community colleges and college, and the student debt requirements that are there. Hope we can talk about that. But I want to talk about basically one-Hope we can talk about that, but I want to talk about basically one big important thing. How do we change the dynamic? This is a gigantic opportunity. As bad as things have gotten, the blinders have sort of been taken off the American people now. They look out there, and we have the pandemic, unemployment. We have race relations that are just been drawn into focus and everything from police brutality to lack of access. But the American people have all of a sudden, average people have gone, “My Lord. Holy mackerel. I didn’t know it was this bad.” A lot of them didn’t know. A lot did. But a lot didn’t know it was this bad. And talking to … Well, I won’t go into it. I’m talking too much now in my opening statement, but here’s the point.

The point is, I believe we have a gigantic opportunity, a gigantic opportunity to fundamentally change the systemic racism and the systemic problems that exist in our system. And I think we have to do it, but only one way to do it. We’ve got to show up and vote. But I believe the American people are not going to be turned off. I believe no matter what the administration does to try to make it hard to vote for everyone, not just people of color, but everyone, no matter what, I think they’re going to vote. You see what’s happened in Virginia, early voting. They have four hour lines in the first day, and we’re over 40 days out. People are going to show up and vote. They will not be dissuaded.And so that’s why I’m optimistic. I was asked by one of the foreign leaders when I was overseas, when I was the vice president, they said, “Can you define America for me?” I said, “Yes, I can, in one word. Possibilities. Possibilities.” We’re the only country that believes anything’s possible. But it’s about time we make it possible for everybody? That’s what this is all about. I think we got a gigantic opportunity in the year 2020 to make these changes. And with that, as my mother would say, I’m going to hush up and take any questions you all have. And I’ve got to get out of the way here.I was kidding Chris inside. I was saying as long as I can say what the best HBCU is in America, Delaware State University. But that’s another issue. That’s a joke, but it’s not a joke. They’re great. That’s how I got my start, by the way. I went to University of Delaware. But the reason I got involved in politics in the first place is because of what was going on in my state in terms of segregation and in terms of Dr. King being assassinated. Part of the, major part of our city was burned to the ground. That’s how I got engaged. And a lot of my support came out of that HBCU.Look, right now, one thing all the data shows is that, given an opportunity, an equal opportunity, there’s not a single thing that an African-American can’t do that a white American can do, that a Hispanic American, an Asian American … I mean, not a single thing. And so what’s happened? It’s about access to opportunity and access to good jobs. Now, an awful lot of universities like, great university like UNC or Wake Forest, a lot of schools, they have endowments, and the endowment allows them to provide for the circumstance to bid for these major federal initiatives that allow them to bring into the school a technology or a program that is able to bring in outside sponsors, as well as government sponsors, and then have students work in those areas.For example, cybersecurity. Cybersecurity is a big deal, but you have to … And as a future, there’s going to be millions of, over time, good paying jobs in the area of cybersecurity. But because the HBCUs, for example, most of them don’t have the economic … They don’t have the endowment to be able to build the facilities that can attract the environment, the government funding, as well as private endowment. They don’t get to set these up.For example, when I was vice president, we went down to Roanoke and we provided funding for an HBCU to have a cybersecurity proposal. They did it. They got the contract. And now what they’re doing are training young women and men who’ll get out and good starting jobs, jobs where you can end up being paid more than a hundred grand a year. And they’re fully, totally, thoroughly capable.What I’ve done is I’ve proposed, and we’ll get this done … I proposed a 10-year program for $70 billion for HBCUs, $70 billion. And that $70 billion will be available through the HBCUs based on their competition to get access to it, but everyone will qualify, every HBCU. And they’ll be able to do the kinds of things that other universities do.For example, Delaware State University is a great university. The president of the university is a young man who used to work for me in my Senate office. Now, brilliant guy. He’s a doctorate. The end result of it is though when the University of Delaware makes an application for dealing with solar energy, because it has a significant base, it gets this significant injection of technological capability, or, for example, light metals. They took over an old facility, it used to be a Ford facility long, long time ago. They took over a facility used to be a Chrysler facility and got shut down. And now what do they have at that facility? They have people in that facility who are now doing metallurgy that relate to making lightweight aluminum and metal decks for aircraft carriers. Well, it’s a multi-million dollar and will end up being a billion-dollar project. And so the people who get to work on that, the very students in that university get to work on it, they’re the ones that are going to go out and get these great jobs. So that’s the first thing I’m going to do for HBCUs.One of the things that really matters to me, is we could do … It didn’t have to be this bad. You have 30 million people on unemployment, you have 20 million people figuring whether or not they can pay their mortgage payment this month, and what they’re going to be able to do or not do as the consequence of that, and you’ve got millions of people who are worried that they’re going to be thrown out in the street because they can’t pay their rent. Although they’ve been given a reprieve for three months, but they have to pay double the next three months when it comes around.Secondly, we have to look at, and we have been looking at, the idea that we have to bring in HBCUs to engage in more of what we are doing in terms of our national dialogue. And for example, I kid … Two of the guys that are on my co-sponsors of my campaign, African-Americans, they’ve talked about themselves as Morgan men. I’m a Morgan man. Well, there’s a lot of great universities including right here, but we have an opportunity to provide for, you’re able to get to those universities. How can you do it? Well, I’m going to see to it that any family, anyone who comes from a family that makes a total income of less than $125,000 a year gets free college education. They don’t get in. If they get in and qualify, they pay nothing to go to college.Secondly, there are also programs that exist now that if you provide for the work, that you will volunteer to do something in the public interest, and you do it for five years or more, you can deduct $10, 000 a year up to $50,000 off of that debt you have. And you have an awful lot of young African-Americans that have graduated. The average debt is about $19,000 a year. Well, it’s hard as hell to get started. Hard to get started when you have that debt hanging over your head. The average debt is even higher. It’s up to $28,000 a year, someone graduating from a four year school.And this generation, this whole new generation from 9/11 on, that in fact is, they’re not in a position to be able to do it. So there’s a whole lot of reasons that economically this will benefit. This isn’t just draining money. And by the way, I pay for every one of these things by the way, I deal with the tax structure. But that’s another story. So that’s a piece of what I think we can and should be doing with HBCUs. And secondly, I will, in my administration, elevate, elevate the standing of HBCUs by the people in my administration as well.And that’s why the economists had predicted prior to, and I’ll end with this, I’m telling you too much, but because I’m pretty passionate about this. What happens is that if, it was pointed out before the COVID crisis, that we’re going to have an economic slowdown because the entire generation, this from 9/11 generation through to the generation now, and coming out of this, this god-awful circumstance we’re in, they, in fact, are not going to have the wherewithal because of student debt to be able to borrow the money to buy a home, buy a new vehicle, buy an apartment, and spend the money and capital, where a significant portion of our economy is driven by consumption, by consumption.We’re going to raise it to $15 an hour nationally. I’ve been deeply involved in raising it as I’ve gone around the country working with cities and counties that in fact have raised it, including New York City and out on the West Coast, as well. Here’s the deal. If you make less than $15 an hour working 40 hours a week, you’re making a wage under the poverty level. No one in America should be working for a 40-hour week job and still be living in poverty. It should not exist. Number one.

Number two, it also demonstrates that if we pay people $15 an hour as a minimum wage, you grow the economy. The idea that this somehow puts people out of business, there’s no evidence of that. What happens is you have people, if you’re making 15 bucks an hour instead of $7 an hour, you’re able to buy more things. You’re able to pay more bills. You’re able to do more that ends up increasing the GDP, the growth of the whole economy. So it’s not only a good thing for the person who is going to be making a decent wage from the beginning, but going to be good for the economy as a whole.My mother would say, “God love you, dear.” Well, as a simple proposition for me, I don’t exaggerate as a second grade teacher, why you’re so important. If I had only $1 to spend in education and I could spend it post-graduation or pre-kindergarten, I’d spend it pre-kindergarten. Not a joke. Because you know as well as I do based on your educational background, that 60% of a child’s brain is already developed by the time they’re three, four, five years old. And so what happens is, people start off based on their ZIP code and their family background. They may start off way behind the curve. You know you have a lot of students who they come into school, if they come from a very poor background in a community raised by a single mom or a single dad, through no fault of their own, they will have probably heard 1 million fewer words spoken by the time they get to first grade. That by itself is an impediment. Nobody’s forced that on anybody, but we’ve got to change it. And so the way to change it is threefold.Number one, as I said, provide for early education, starting at three years of age, and it’s not … This is you think, “Oh my Lord, why we have a three-year-old go to school?” They learn as rapidly as a six-year-old, a 12-year-old, a 14-year-old. And they just suck it all up. They just suck it all up. Number one. Number two, to make sure that we pay teachers enough money to stay in the business of teaching. My wife’s a full-time teacher. My wife has never stopped. As first lady, as the second lady, I should say, she taught 15 credits every semester at a community college. Before that, she taught juniors and-At a community college. Before that, she taught juniors and seniors in high school for 25 years. I think it was 25. My point is a long time. Although, I’m not allowed to tell the exact number because my wife is 30 years younger than I am. I started off not quite that much. There’s no woman in the entire Biden family as old as any man, but that’s another issue. All kidding aside, the fact is that it is the lifeblood of… Look, people… They say, “Well, these two children.” They’re all our children. They are the kite strings that lift our national ambitions aloft.It’s bizarre, crazy for us. In every single empirical study done, the more money you spend, the better you educate a child throughout the process, the better the community as a whole is. Everybody, across the board. That’s why we also have to make sure that we provide for more direct funding for specific programs in schools. As you know, better than most will know, the bulk of all the funding, if your school uses local funding.How people going to do that? And the way, in fact, the Democratic House and the Senate passed, stepped up and passed a significant amount of money to help people get through the process, including keeping businesses open and the like. Well, guess what? They insisted there being a thing called an inspector general, somebody watching where every dollar went. The first thing the president of the United States did is fire that inspector general. There is no inspector. He’s fired. Fired. And so you got 40% of, only 40% of the money intended for small businesses going to small businesses. Only 40% of it. 60% has gone to the Mar-a-Lago crowd.It’s not national funding. It’s not federal funding. Federal funding can focus on particular needs within schools. One of those needs is to deal with access to equal education in the early grades and not be determined by your zip code. That requires us to spend more money on schools that in fact, and teachers… Look, I’m not going to ask you what you make. Teachers… One of the other things that all the studies have shown is that when you’re in a student body where there’s students of color, it makes a gigantic difference if there are teachers of color, particularly male teachers of color.A gigantic difference. It’s just a factual predicate. We have to encourage schools of education to attract more people of color to get in and teach. The only way to do that is to raise the salaries. I mean, idea that a teacher is out there after several years making $40,000… You have, probably, a student debt larger than that. Enough, for real. That’s why the last piece of the student debt… Anybody who has a student debt who teaches, that counts as working for the national interest. You get to deduct $ 10,000 of that student debt per year for five years, and up to $50,000 if you’re teaching.We can afford this, by the way. This is not something that we have… Just give you a little idea here. I carry this card with me because everybody says, “Well, Biden’s going to raise all taxes, and everybody’s going to be in trouble, and what we’re going to do here.” Let’s see if I can find it, if I have it here. Anyway, I have a list of how I will fund every single thing that I’m talking about. For example, if we just made corporations not pay 21%, and 91 of the Fortune 500 companies pay no tax, zero, zero, okay, none… If we just made them pay 28, it used to be 38, make 28%, raise it to 28%, and everybody had to pay it, that would raise a total of $ 1,370 billion. I’m not trying to punish anybody. It’s time for everybody to start paying their fair share.President has a new proposal. Some of you may like it. I don’t know anybody in my neighborhood know it works very well, and that is another $30 billion tax cut for billionaires. You think I’m making it like billionaire. I sound like Bernie Sanders, “Billionaires are bad.” That’s not the problem. Problem is in reducing the capital gains tax… If you make your money off investments as opposed to sweating your brow or walking up and getting a paycheck, right, he thinks you should only have to pay 15% of your income. You’ll pay more as a school teacher than somebody making $20 million bucks. It’s all coming from investments. It’s not right. Don’t want to punish anybody. Just about time everybody pays their fair share. The way I do that is I raise the tax back for millionaires and billionaires to 39.4%. They’re talking about 90%. That’s not true. It was 39.4% when Bush was president. You just raise that tax rate back up to 39.4%. That raises 6%. That raises $90 billion. Just give you an example.There’s much more I could talk, but my point is it will not… By the way, I went to undergraduate and graduate school. I was very flattered that, I think it’s 14 Nobel Laureates in economics, just endorsed me, and said my plans make sense. All this stuff about Biden’s going to bankrupt the country and Biden is going to spend $400 billion, and you’re going to raise your taxes… not true. We can do it all by just somebody just starting to pay your fair share. That’s all. That’s all. Give people who need a break, a break.Yes. There was a big plan to do it. There’s a modal plan. First of all, the Cares Act, which passed out of the House and Senate, which was a total of $2 trillion overall, twice, was supposed to provide what they called the Main Street Lending Program. For four months, it didn’t lend a penny. None of the money went out, number one, because you got 20 Republicans in the Senate who said they don’t want to depend anything on anything, for real. The president who has, as I said, fired the Inspector General, so you don’t know where the money’s going for certain. Secondly, on the early program for small businesses… The small business is defined of fewer than 50 employees. Now, most small businesses that are neighborhood small businesses are 10 or fewer employees.What I propose is we focus on making sure that the money goes directly to those businesses that in fact provide for being able to keep their employees on the payroll for the 10 or fewer employees. That’s a priority, and then 50 and under. Here’s what’s happened. What’s happened is that not only has that not occurred, a lot of the money has gone to very big businesses that didn’t need the… I mean, they may need it, but they didn’t need it to stay alive. Even when they got it, what did they do?The commitment that I proposed, and we thought we had done, is that right now, if you get a government bailout, quote, unquote, “loan to stay alive,” what you cannot do is take that money and either buy back your own stock and, or increase your salaries with that money. It’s to keep people employed, keep them on a payroll. That’s what a lot of the businesses have done. They buy back their own stock, increasing the net worth of the people who own the stock, and in fact, pay their salaries based on stock then. They should not be allowed to do that, number one, with government money, bailing people out.What I propose is we focus on making sure that the money goes directly to those businesses that in fact provide for being able to keep their employees on the payroll for the 10 or fewer employees. That’s a priority, and then 50 and under. Here’s what’s happened. What’s happened is that not only has that not occurred, a lot of the money has gone to very big businesses that didn’t need the… I mean, they may need it, but they didn’t need it to stay alive. Even when they got it, what did they do?The commitment that I proposed, and we thought we had done, is that right now, if you get a government bailout, quote, unquote, “loan to stay alive,” what you cannot do is take that money and either buy back your own stock and, or increase your salaries with that money. It’s to keep people employed, keep them on a payroll. That’s what a lot of the businesses have done. They buy back their own stock, increasing the net worth of the people who own the stock, and in fact, pay their salaries based on stock then. They should not be allowed to do that, number one, with government money, bailing people out.In addition to that, we find ourselves in a circumstance where the idea that we’re going to continue to provide for unemployment insurance for people is very much in doubt, although the House just passed a package today. My generic point is, that the University of Columbia pointed out, that if in fact the president had acted, even though we know now he knew exactly how bad the pandemic was back in February, he’s on tape with Bob Woodward saying he knew how bad it was, and he didn’t say a thing. He didn’t say a thing.Secondly, a lot of you don’t know the circumstance. Now there’s no national standards as to how to open. How do you open safely? President says, “Just put up a sign, Come on in.” Well, you know your employee. Beyond your employees, your customers are going to go, “I don’t know. I mean, does everybody have to have the mask? Do they have dividers in the restaurant? Tell me how the sanitary conditions are working.” Well, you need money to pay for all that stuff. That’s why we proposed to have a multi-billion dollar program where businesses are able to get the money, not borrow the money, get the money to be able to open in the middle of this pandemic, including fixing the testing fiasco.You should be in a situation where your employees can, in 24 hours, get a test to determine whether or not they’re positive or negative. You need to do that for your own protection, and the public likes to know that is protection that there are protection against anything that happens within your restaurant. The bottom line is the money is already there. The president is just not releasing it. Department is not releasing the money. It’s all done in order to be able to keep the economy moving.Right now, we have over 30 million people on unemployment, over 30 million in unemployment. How in God’s name are we going to generate economic growth unless we can figure out how to keep these people back and help you get back in business? It’s the same way with schools. How many schools are not opening because there are no national standards set? No national standards set. For example, there’s a outfit… Am I telling you too much? You want me to stop?Okay. I’m really good at this. This drives me crazy. Right now, we’re in a situation where if you take a look, there is no national standard for how to open schools, how to open them safely, because the president says, “I have no responsibility. That’s not my response.” I mean, literally, that’s his phrase. “It’s not my responsibility. I’m not the blame for any of this. Let the governors or the mayors take care of it,” and then without the financial help that’s needed to be able to take care of it. I’ve laid out in detail back in July, what we’d have to do to open safely and includes providing the protective PPE, the mask, and other things that are needed, gloves, et cetera, for the schools, the school teachers, and for the children coming to school.Secondly, you have to reduce the number of students in one room. You have to have modules that are smaller. For that, you need more teachers, not fewer teachers. You got to pay more teachers. Number three, you’ve got to be able to sanitize the schools, whether it’s everything from the water fountain to the lavatory, or just the surfaces that are touched, and what is breathed on by people. That costs a lot of money to do that, like it would for a restaurant as well for you to have to do that.The money is there, available, to do that, but the president refuses. What he says is just open up and make sure that… School should just open up. It also relates to how far down you’ve got the reinfection rate. If it’s down below one, then it’s rational. You can, with those protections, go ahead and open a school, but watch it very closely. It requires testing and tracing to make sure you’re still on course there.Look, the other thing is that if you think about it, the FEMA, the Federal Emergency… They had agreed that they were going to provide masks for schools. They started to hand them out to schools. Well, guess what? The president didn’t like that, or somebody didn’t like that. The ruling was made, “Opening schools safely is not a national emergency,” so they stopped it. Refusing to even provide masks for schools because it’s not a national emergency. Well, if this isn’t a national emergency, I don’t know what the hell is. The way we’re doing this is the way… I’ll end with this.way and I’ll end with this. The president was in Ohio, I guess a couple of days ago at a rally. I don’t want to misquote him. And he said at the rally and I wrote this down, he said that “We virtually turned the corner. Nobody is really dying.” He said, “Yeah, elderly people are dying and they’re dying because they have heart conditions or other, but quote unquote, “virtually, they’re virtually nobodies. They’re the only ones dying.”So you go home and your mom is gone, your dad’s gone. He’s a virtual nobody? The idea, the way we’re talking about people, and this is all within our power to do something. The virus wasn’t his fault, but the way he’s handled it has been close to criminal. And so many people breaking their necks and by the way, my deceased wife, when I first got married, I married a beautiful woman from Syracuse, New York, Skaneateles, New York. And I got elected and I was 29-years-old. I come from a very modest family. Not bragging about it, but I was listed as the poorest man in Congress for 36 years. Because I didn’t think you were supposed to earn any money while you’re there other than your salary.sAnd then when I got elected vice president, one of the press outlets said, “It’s probable no man has ever been assuming the office of vice president with fewer assets than Joe Biden.” I hope they weren’t talking intellectual assets. When I got elected when I was 29, I was in Washington before I was sworn in and I got a phone call from my fire department saying my wife and daughter have just been killed. And my two boys were not likely to make it. A tractor trailer broadsided them while they were Christmas shopping. And at the time, my wife’s father, my father-in-law, he came home from World War II and he had owned a restaurant. He was a cook in World War II in the Navy and he ended up opening up a restaurant in a place called Auburn, New York, a town about 20,000 people, just south of Syracuse.If he had spoken, as I said, they said at Columbia, one week earlier, 37,000 more people be alive today. We’re going to have another influx of cases, just between now and January, it’s expected that we’re going to have somewhere between, depending on which estimate you take, between 138 and 178,000 more deaths. And if people just do what we’re doing here, and when you’re at a social distance, as I am, you can take a mask off, but wear a mask. They estimate that would save about close to 89, 90,000 people. And so it’s about being responsible. It’s about being responsible. And we’re not being very responsible.And it became the meeting place for everybody. It’s a place that doctors would start off the morning getting their coffee and the lawyers would have their lunch and kids after graduations would come to this called the Hunter Dinerant and then he opened up other restaurants. And in order to try to convince me to stay, I don’t blame him. I do the same with my daughter. Try to convince after he graduated to take a job in Upstate New York, rather than go back to Delaware. He offered me his prize diner. And he was making at that time, I would have made five times what I made as a lawyer. A starting lawyer salary is six grand and it was 30,000 bucks a year.But the problem was for three years, I had five years I watched how hard he worked. I don’t know how you do it. You got to love it. Even in good times they think you’re crazy. It’s 24 hours a day, but you deserve a break and your employees deserve a break. And the fact that you’re fighting so hard to keep them on a job is a testament to the kind of people you are. But I promise you, I guarantee you if I’m elected, you’ll get both the PPE. You’ll get also the money to be able to open and the additional money, not only to maintain your employees, but to maintain an open place that you in fact can.Well, first of all, and I guess I’ll just say it. This has been the most corrupt administration in modern American history. The Justice Department has turned into the president’s private law firm. He actually has them representing him on women who accused him of rape. Where does that come from? And the Justice Department under my administration will be totally independent of me.I’ve met with a lot of restaurateurs up and around the country so they can open up and do everything from having plastic shields in front of the cashiers, to a lot of things you can do to make it safe, make it safe, and you’ll get the help.Thank you. I can really do yes or no if you ask me the easy questions. I used to be a city council when I ran for the Senate because it was too hard. They know where you live.I will not direct them who to prosecute, how to prosecute, what to prosecute. And I will not be injecting. I will not enter their decisions based upon the judgments they make about what cases they bring and they don’t bring. With regard to the Civil Rights Division, I would significantly increase two things. One, civil rights presence in the Justice Department elevated so it has access to and transparency to all police departments’ activities across the country. Just so they are aware that it’s transparent what’s going on.I would also make sure that I elevate the Justice Department, excuse me, the Civil Rights Division to have a direct office with inside the White House. When, for example, I’m the guy that wrote the Violence Against Women Act. When the president asked me what I wanted as vice president, I said, “I want to have jurisdiction over that act inside the White House.” Because it elevates the standing of whatever that office that comes inside the White House.So I would make sure there’s a combination of the Civil Rights Division having more direct authority inside the Justice Department and being able to investigate than in fact it has now. But most of all, most of all, I would have an attorney general who understood his oath of office. It’s not a joke. The attorney general has the oath of office that in fact could do and move on what the professionals in the department thought had to be pursued without my interfering to say, “No, they’re my friends” or “I know them” or “Go after this person. Go after Hillary.” You know what I mean? This kind of stuff.I get asked the question all the time by the press that travels with me, although I’m not sure the same ones that are traveling today have asked it, but I get asked the following question. “If in fact you get elected, would you prosecute Trump? Would you pursue prosecuting Trump?” And the answer is I’m not going to pursue prosecuting anybody. I’m going to do what the Justice Department says should be done, should be done and not politicize it. It’s the most dangerous thing that’s happened so far is the politicization of the Department of Justice. It’s become the Department of Trump and that’s wrong.Who’s the fellow who runs 26 organizations for housing? Public? I know we didn’t get a chance to talk. Because I think what you’re doing is incredibly consequential. And I like to give you a paper on the way out of what I think we can and should do. It’s very detailed and I’d love your feedback. I’ll put a phone number on it, okay? Because it is a gigantic, gigantic, gigantic undertaking. And unless we can get people into housing, unless we can provide for housing, unless we can stop the gentrification where people are left out, then we’re going to be in real trouble.

And what you’re doing is really … I’m not trying to boost him. I’ve never met the gentleman, but I did read your bio and what you’re working on. And I’d really like your input and may able to call you if I could after you get what I’m proposing in detail and see what we can work out. And part of the reason I do this and what I miss about being able to do larger engagements is this is where I learn. I’m a tactical guy. I mean, I’d rather be shaking your hand and looking you in the eye and you telling me what needs to be done.But what I want to talk to you about today is that we have to break a cycle. The cycle that exist is that the African-American community by and large finds itself at the bottom of the economic heap, businesses and others, when things are good. When things get bad, they’re the first ones in the hole. And when things get better, they’re the last ones out. In addition to that, we have a criminal justice system that needs significant repair. And we’re just only beginning, slightly, to make some progress now.

And don’t be reluctant at all to criticized my plan if you think it doesn’t make sense. I think it’s pretty good. I’ve worked on it really, really hard. It goes from Section 8 housing all the way to first-time home buyers, to the whole notion of these… Anyway, I’m going to give it to you before I leave, okay? You’re very polite to sit here all this time. Thank you. Thank you everybody. I really appreciate it.And thirdly, if you’re a business person, let me put it this way. Every person out there wants an opportunity to make it for their family. My dad used to have an expression, “Everybody’s entitled to be treated with dignity.” And then he said, “Joey, a job is about a lot more than a paycheck. It’s about your dignity. It’s about respect. It’s about your place in the community. It’s about being able to hold your head up. It’s about being able to look your kid in the eye and say, ‘Honey, everything’s going to be okay.'”For too many people, particularly in the African-American community, they can’t say that. That’s not able to be done. So one of the things that I want to talk with you about today, is how do we build wealth? Because ultimately, ultimately the African-American community only is going to have its place equal to everyone else when they’re in a position to be able to build wealth, be able to build wealth. And that goes for everything from access to being able to purchase a home, access to jobs, access to just being able to have an even shot. And that’s what I hope we’re going to talk a little about today.It goes to education, as well as access to education, access beyond. Everything from a lot of poor whites and African-Americans, poor African-Americans and Hispanic live in Title I districts, meaning that they live in school districts that have very low tax base. And right now we spent $15 billion a year to compensate for that low tax base. I increased that to $45 billion. What it does, it keeps teachers in schools because we’re short teachers significantly. 125,000 teachers short right now. Be over half a million by 2023. In addition to that, we find ourselves in a circumstance where we used to have in our schools, in the old days, used to have one … Right now we don’t have any, we virtually have no school psychologists in our schools. And so teachers come in to school and they’re expected to solve every problem. Well, there’s one school psychologist for every 1,507 kids in school. It should be closer to one to 500. We can do that by increasing the money I just talked about from 15 to 45. And send every single child that’s three years old, four years old, and five years old, not to daycare, but to school. All the studies of the great universities in this state and every other have pointed out in the last eight years, that’ll increase by 58% their chances of going all the way through school, no matter what the ZIP code they come from, no matter where they are, and be able to do it without getting themselves in trouble.5 million Americans infected by COVID-19. More than 170,000 Americans have died. By far the worst performance of any nation on earth. More than 50 million people have filed for unemployment this year. More than 10 million people are going to lose their health insurance this year. Nearly one in six, small businesses have closed this year. And this president, if he’s re-elected, you know what will happen. Cases and deaths will remain far too high. More mom and pop businesses will close their doors, and this time for good. Working families will struggle to get by, and yet the wealthiest 1% will get tens of billions of dollars in new taxes breaks and the assault on the Affordable Care Act will continue until it’s destroyed, taking insurance away from more than 20 million people, including more than 15 million people on Medicaid, and getting rid of the protections that President Obama worked so hard to get passed for a hundred million more people who have preexisting conditions.So the question for us is simple. Are we ready? I believe we are. We must be. All elections are important but we know in our bones, this one is more consequential. As many have said, America’s at an inflection point, a time of real peril, but also of extraordinary possibilities. We can choose a path of becoming angrier, less hopeful, more divided, a path of shadow and suspicion, or we can choose a different path and together take this chance to heal, to reform, to unite, a path of hope and light. This is a life-changing election. This will determine what America is going to look like for a long, long time. Character is on the ballot, compassion is on the ballot, decency, science, democracy, they’re all on the ballot. Who we are as a nation, what we stand for, and most importantly, who we want to be, that’s all on the ballot. And the choice could not be more clear. No rhetoric is needed. Just judge this president on the facts.This campaign isn’t just about winning votes. It’s about winning the heart, and yes, the soul of America. Winning it for the generous among us, not the selfish. Winning it for workers who keep this country going, not just the privileged few at the top. Winning it for those communities who have known the injustice of a knee on the neck. For all of the young people who have known only America being a rising inequity and shrinking opportunity. They deserve the experience of America’s promise. They deserve to experience it in full. No generation never knows what history will ask of it. All we can ever know is whether we’re ready when that moment arrives. And now history has delivered us to one of the most difficult moments America’s ever faced. Four, four historic crises, all at the same time. A perfect storm, the worst pandemic in over a hundred years, the worst economic crisis since The Great Depression, the most compelling call for racial justice since the sixties and the undeniable and just the accelerating threats of climate change.But while I’ll be a democratic candidate, I will be an American president. I’ll work hard for those who didn’t support me, as hard for them as I did for those who did vote for me. That’s the job of a president. To represent all of us, not just our base or our party. This is not a partisan moment. This must be an American moment. It’s a moment that calls for hope, and light, and love. Hope for our future, light to see our way forward, and love for one another. America isn’t just a collection of clashing interest, of red states or blue states. We’re so much bigger than that. We’re so much better than that. Now, nearly a century ago, Franklin Roosevelt pledged a new deal in a time of massive unemployment, uncertainty, and fear. Stricken by a disease, stricken by a virus, FDR insisted that he would recover and prevail and he believed America could as well. And he did and we can as well.The civil rights movement left us with this wisdom, give people light and they will find the way. Give people light. Those are words for our time. The current president has cloaked America in darkness for much too long. Too much anger, too much fear, too much division. Here and now I give you my word, if you entrust me with the presidency, I will draw on the best of us, not the worst. I’ll be an ally of the light, not the darkness. It’s time for us, for we the people to come together. And make no mistake. United we can and will overcome this season of darkness in America. We’ll choose hope over fear, facts over fiction, fairness over privilege. I’m a proud Democrat, and I’ll be proud to carry the banner of our party into the general election. So it’s with great honor and humility, I accept this nomination for president of the United States of America.And for our seniors, social security is a sacred obligation, a sacred promise made they paid for. The current president is threatening to break that promise. He’s proposing to eliminate a tax that pays for almost half the social security, without any way of making up for that loss revenue, resulting in cuts. I will not let that happen. If I’m your president, we’re going to protect social security and Medicare. You have my word. One of the most powerful voices we hear in the country today is from our young people. They’re speaking to the inequity and injustice that has grown up in America. Economic injustice, racial injustice, environmental injustice. I hear their voices, if you listen, you can hear them too. And whether it’s the existential threat posed by climate change, the daily fear of being gunned down in school, or the inability to get started in your first job, it will be the work of the next president to restore the promise of America to everyone. And I’m not going to have to do it alone because I’ll have a great vice president at my side, Senator Kamala Harris.And with newly empowered labor unions. They’re the ones that build the middle class. With equal pay for women, with rising wages you could raise a child on, a family on. And yes, we’re going to do more than praise our essential workers. We’re finally going to pay them. Pay them. We can and we will deal with climate change. It’s not only a crisis, it’s an enormous opportunity, an opportunity for America to lead the world in clean energy and create millions of new, good-paying jobs in the process. And we can pay for these investments by ending loopholes, unnecessary loopholes, and the president’s $1.3 trillion tax giveaway to the wealthiest 1% and the biggest, most profitable corporations, some of which do not pay any tax at all. Because we don’t need a tax code that rewards wealth more than it rewards work. I’m not looking to punish anyone. Far from it. But it’s long past time the wealthiest people and the biggest corporations in this country paid their fair share.I’ve never forgotten those lessons. That’s why my economic plan is all about jobs, dignity, respect, and community. Together we can and will rebuild our economy. And when we do, we’ll not only build back, we’ll build back better, with modern roads, bridges, highways, broadband, ports and airports as a new foundation for economic growth, with pipes of transport, clean water, to every community, with 5 million new manufacturing and technology jobs so the future is made in America. With a healthcare system that lowers premiums, deductibles, drug prices, by building on the Affordable Care Act he’s trying to rip away. With an education system that trains our people for the best jobs of the 21st century. There’s not a single thing american workers can’t do. And where cost doesn’t prevent young people from going to college and student debt doesn’t crush them when they get out. With a childcare and eldercare system that makes it possible for parents to go to work and for the elderly to stay in their homes with dignity. With an immigration system that powers our economy and reflects our values.We have a great purpose as a nation to open the doors of opportunity to all Americans, to save our democracy, to be a light to the world once again, and finally, to live up to and make real the words written in the sacred documents that founded this nation, that all men and women are created equal, endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights among them, life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. My dad was an honorable, decent man. He got knocked down a few times, pretty hard, but he always got back up. He worked hard and he built a great middle class life for our family. He used to say, “Joey, I don’t expect the government to solve my problems, but I sure in hell expect them to understand them.” And then he’d say, “Joey, a job is about a lot more than a paycheck. It’s about your dignity. It’s about respect. It’s about your place in the community. It’s about being able to look your kid in the eye and say, ‘Honey, it’s going to be okay,’ and mean it.”As president, I’ll make you a promise. I’ll protect America, I will defend us from every attack, seen and unseen, always, without exception, every time. Look, I understand. I understand how hard it is to have any hope right now. On this summer night, let me take a moment to speak to those you who have lost the most. I have some idea how it feels to lose someone you love. I know that deep black hole that opens up in the middle of your chest and you feel like you’re being sucked into it. I know how mean, and cruel, and unfair life can be sometimes. But I’ve learned two things. First, your loved one may have left this earth, but they’ll never leave your heart. They’ll always be with you, you always hear them. And second, I’ve found the best way through pain and loss and grief is to find purpose. As God’s children, each of us have a purpose in our lives.Well, I do. If I’m your president, on day one, we’ll implement the national strategy I’ve been laying out since March. We’ll develop and deploy rapid tests for the results available immediately. We’ll make the medical supplies and protective equipment that our country needs, and we’ll make them here in America, so we will never again be at the mercy of China or other foreign countries in order to protect our own people. We’ll make sure our schools have the resources they need to be open, safe, and effective. We’ll put politics aside. We’ll take the muzzle off our experts, so the public gets the information they need and deserve, honest unvarnished truth. They can handle it. We’ll have a national mandate to wear a mask, not as a burden, but as a patriotic duty to protect one another. In short, we’ll do what we should have done from the very beginning. Our current president has failed in his most basic duty to the nation. He’s failed to protect us. He’s failed to protect America. And my fellow Americans, that is unforgivable.As president the first step I will take would be to get control of the virus that has ruined so many lives because I understand something this president hasn’t from the beginning, we will never get our economy back on track, we will never get our kids safely back in schools, we’ll never have our lives back until we deal with this virus. The tragedy of where we are today is it didn’t have to be this bad. Just look around. It’s not this bad in Canada, or Europe, or Japan, or almost anywhere else in the world. And the president keeps telling us, the virus is going to disappear. He keeps waiting for a miracle. Well, I have news for him. No miracle is coming. We lead the world in confirmed cases, we lead the world in deaths. Our economy is in tatters, with Black, Latino, Asian-American, Native American communities bearing the brunt of it. And after all this time, the president still does not have a plan.And speaking of President Obama, a man I was honored to serve alongside for eight years as vice president. Let me take this moment to say something we don’t say nearly enough. Thank you, Mr. President, you were a great president, a president that our children could and did look up to. No one’s going to say that about the current occupant of the White House. What you know about this president is if he’s given four more years, he’ll be what he’s been for the last four years. The president takes no responsibility, refuses to lead, blames others, cozies up to dictators, and fans the flames of hate and division. He’ll wake up every day believing that job is all about him, never about you. Is that the America you want for you, your family, your children? I see a different America, one that’s generous and strong, selfless, and humble. It’s an America we could rebuild together.

The Irish poet, Seamus Heaney once wrote, “History says, don’t hope on this side of the grave, but then, once in a lifetime, the longed-for tidal wave of justice can rise up and hope and history rhyme.” This is our moment to make hope and history rhyme with passion and purpose. Let us begin you and I together, one nation, under God, united in our love for America, united in our love for each other. For love is more powerful than hate, hope is more powerful than fear, and light is more powerful than dark. This is our moment, this is our mission. May history be able to say that the end of this chapter of American darkness began here tonight as love and hope and light join in the battle for the soul of the nation. And this is a battle we will win and we’ll do it together. I promise you. Thank you, and may God bless you, and may God protect our troops.Many people have heard me say this but I’ve always believed you can define America in one word, possibilities. The defining feature of America, everything is possible. That in America, everyone, and I mean, everyone should be given an opportunity to go as far as their dreams and God-given ability will take them. We can never lose that. In times as challenging as these, I believe there’s only one way forward, as united America, a united America, united in our pursuit of a more perfect union. United in our dreams of a better future for us and for our children. United in our determination to make the coming years bright. Are you ready? I believe we are. This is a great nation. We’re good and decent people. For Lord’s sake this is the United States of America, and there’s never been anything we’ve been able to accomplish when we’ve done it together.One of the most important conversations I’ve had this entire campaign. It was so someone who was much too young to vote. I met with six year old Gianna Floyd the day before her daddy, George Lloyd was laid to rest. She’s an incredibly brave little girl and I’ll never forget it. When I leaned down to speak to her, she looked in my eyes and she said, and I quote, “Daddy changed the world.” Daddy changed the world. Her words burrowed deep into my heart. Maybe George Floyd’s murder was a breaking point. Maybe John Lewis’ passing is the inspiration. But however it’s come to be, however it’s happened, America’s ready in John’s words, to lay down, quote, “The heavy burden of hate at last.” And in the hard work of rooting out our systemic racism. American history tells us that it’s been in our darkest moments that we’ve made our greatest progress, that we found the light. In this dark moment, I believe we’re poised to make great progress again, that we can find the light once more.I’ll work in common purpose for more secure, peaceful, and prosperous world. History has thrust one more urgent task on us. Will we be the generation that finally wipes out the stain of racism from our national character? I believe we’re up to it. I believe we’re ready. Just a week ago yesterday, was the third anniversary of the events in Charlottesville. Close your eyes, remember what you saw on television. Remember seeing those neo-Nazis, and Klansmen, and white supremacists coming out of fields with lighted torches, veins bulging, spewing the same anti-Semitic bile heard across Europe in the thirties. Remember the violent clash that ensued between those spreading hate, and those with the courage to stand against it. Remember what the president said when asked. He said they were “very fine people on both sides.” It was a wake up call for us as a country, and for me, a call to action. At that moment, I knew I’d have to run, because my father taught us that silence was complicity, and I can never remain silent or complicit. At the time, I said we’re in the battle for the soul of this nation, and we are.She was a great second lady and I know she’ll make a great first lady for this nation. She loves this country so much. And I’ll always have the strength that can only come from family. Hunter, Ashley, all our grandchildren, my brothers, my sister, they give me courage, they lift me up. While he’s no longer with us, Beau inspires me every day. Beau served our nation in uniform, a year in Iraq, a decorated Iraqi war veteran. So I take very personally the profound responsibility of serving as commander in chief. I’ll be a president who’ll stand with our allies and friends and make it clear to our adversaries, the days of cozying up to dictators is over. Under President Biden, america will not turn a blind eye to Russian bounties on their heads of American soldiers, nor will I put up with foreign interference in our most sacred democratic exercise, voting. And I’ll always stand for our values of human rights and dignity.he’s a powerful voice for this nation. Her story is the American story. She knows about all the obstacles thrown in the way of so many in our country, women, Black women, Black Americans, South Asian Americans, immigrants, the left out and the left behind, but she’s overcome every obstacle she’s ever faced. No one’s been tougher on the big banks and the gun lobby. No one has been tougher in calling out the current administration for its extremism, its failure to follow the law, its failure to simply tell the truth. Kamala and I both draw from our families. That’s where we get our strength. For Kamala it’s Doug and their families. For me, it’s Jill and ours. I’ve said many times, no man deserves one great love in his life, let alone two. But I’ve known two. After losing my first wife in that car accident, Jill came into my life. She put our family back together. She’s an educator, a mom, a military mom, and an unstoppable force. If she puts her mind to it, just get out of the way. She’s going to get it done.Authorized by the Continental Congress, took place on December 18th, 1777. Was celebrated by General George Washington and his troops at Gulph Mills on the way to Valley Forge. And it took place under extremely harsh conditions in deprivation, lacking food, clothing, shelter. They’re preparing to ride out a long, hard winter. And today you can find a plaque in Gulph Mills marking that moment. Here’s what the plaque reads. It says, “This Thanksgiving in spite of the suffering showed the reverence in character that was forging the soul of a nation.” Forging the soul of a nation, faith, courage, sacrifice, service to country, service to each other and gratitude, even in the face of suffering, have long being part of what Thanksgiving means in America. Now, looking back over our history, you see that it’s been in the most difficult circumstances that the soul of our nation has been forged. Joe Biden: And now we find ourselves again, facing a long, hard winter. We fought nearly a year long battle with a virus that has devastated this nation. This brought us pain and loss and frustration. And has cost so many lives, 260000 Americans and counting. It’s divided us, angered us, set us against one another. I know the country has grown wary of the fight. We need to remember we’re war with the virus, not with one another, not with each other. This is the moment where we need to instill our spines, redouble our efforts and recommit ourselves to the fight. Let’s remember, we’re all in this together. Sounds trite to say, but we’re all in this together. For so many of us, it’s hard to hear this fight isn’t over. We still have months of this battle ahead of us. Joe Biden: For those who have lost a loved one, I know that this time of year can be especially difficult. Believe me. I know. I remember that first Thanksgiving. The empty chair, the silence, takes your breath away. It’s really hard to care. It’s hard to give thanks. It’s hard to even think of looking forward and it’s so hard to hope. I understand. Can’t be thinking and praying for each and every one of you at this Thanksgiving. At your Thanksgiving table, because we’ve been there. This year, we’re asking Americans to forego so many of the traditions that we’ve long made this holiday, which made it so special. For our families, for 40 some years, we’ve had a tradition of traveling over Thanksgiving. Tradition that we’ve kept every year, save one. The year our son Beau die. But this year we’ll be staying home. We’ve always had a big family gathering at Thanksgiving. Kids, grandkids, aunts, uncles, brothers, sisters, and more. Joe Biden: With The Bidens, the days around Thanksgiving have always been a time to remember all we had to be grateful for and a time to begin to think about Christmas and begin even to do the Christmas list. But this year, because we care so much for each other, we’re going to be having a separate Thanksgiving. For Jill and I, we’ll be at our home in Delaware with our daughter and our son-in-law. The rest of the family will be doing the same thing in small groups. So I know how hard it is to forgo family traditions, but it’s so very important. Our country’s in the middle of a dramatic spike in cases. We’re now averaging 160000 new cases a day. No one would be surprised if we hit 200000 cases in a single day. Many local health systems are at risk of being overwhelmed. That’s the plain and simple truth. Nothing made up. It’s real. Joe Biden: And I believe you always deserve to hear the truth. Hear the truth from your president. We have to try to slow the growth of this virus. We owe it to the doctors and the nurses and other frontline workers, care workers who’ve risked their lives. Some lost their lives. Put so much on the line in a heroic battle in this virus against it for so long. We owe that to our fellow citizens who need access to hospital beds and care to fight this disease. We owe it to one another. It’s literally our patriotic duty as Americans. It means wearing a mask, keeping social distancing, limiting the size of any group we’re in. Until we have a vaccine, these are the most effective tools to combat the virus. Starting on day one of my presidency, we will take steps that will change the course of this disease. Joe Biden: More testing. We’ll find people with cases and get them away from one another, slowing the number of infections. More protective gear for businesses and our schools to do the same, reducing the number of cases. Clear guidance, we’ll get more businesses and more schools open. We all have a role to play in beating this crisis. The federal government has vast powers to combat the virus. And I commit to you, I will use all of those powers to lead a national coordinated response, but the federal government can’t do this alone. Each of us has a responsibility in our own lives, do what we can do to slow the virus. Every decision we make matters. Every decision we make can save lives. None of these steps we’re asking people to take are political statements. Every one of them is based on science, real science. And the good news is there has been significant record-breaking progress made recently in developing a vaccine. And several of these vaccines look extraordinarily effective. Joe Biden: And it happens that we’re on track for the first immunization to begin by late December, early January. Then we’ll need to put in place a distribution plan to get the entire country immunized as soon as possible, which we will do, but it’s going to take time. I’m hoping the news of the vaccine will serve as an incentive to every American, to take these simple steps to get control of the virus. There’s real hope, tangible hope. So, hang on. Don’t let yourselves surrender to the fatigue, which I understand it is real fatigue. I know we can, and we will beat this virus. America’s not going to lose this war. We’ll get our lives back. Life is going to return to normal, I promise you. This will happen. This will not last forever. So yes, it’s been a really hard year, particularly hard for over 250000 people and their families. But I still believe we have much to be thankful for. There’s so much to hope for. Much to build on. Much to dream up. Joe Biden: Here’s the America I see. And I believe it’s the America you see as well. America that faces facts. America that overcomes challenges. An America where we seek justice and equality for all people. An America that holds fast to the conviction that out of pain comes possibility, out of frustration comes progress and out of division unity. You all know in our finest hours, that’s who we’ve always been and that’s what we shall be again. I believe that this grim season of division, demonization is going to give way to a year of light and immunity. Why do I think so? Because America is a nation not of adversaries, but of neighbors. Not of limitations, but of possibilities. Not of dreams deferred, but of dreams realized. I’ve said many times that this is a great country. We are a good people. This is the United States of America. And there’s never been anything we’ve been unable to do when we’ve done it together. Joe Biden: Think of what we come through. As a nation, how many things we’ve come through? Centuries of human enslavement, cataclysmic civil war, exclusion of women from the ballot box, world wars, Jim Crow, the long twilight struggle against Soviet tyranny that could have ended not in the fall of the Berlin Wall, but a nuclear Armageddon. Look, I’m not naive. I know that history is just that, history. But to know what came before, what come before, what’s happened before, can help arm us against despair. Knowing that previous generations got through the same universal human challenge that we face, the tension between selfishness and generosity, between fear and hope, between division and unity. Joe Biden: What was it that brought the reality of America into closer alignment with the promise of reality, justice and prosperity? It sounds corny, but it was love, plain and simple. Love of country. Love of one another. We don’t talk much about loving our politics. The political run is too loud, too angry, too heated. To love our neighbor as ourselves is a radical act. It is what we’re called to do. We must try. Only in trying, only in listening, only in seeing ourselves as bound together. And what Dr. King called the mutual garment of destiny, can we rise above divisions and truly heal. Look, we all know America is never been perfect. We’ve always tried to fulfill the aspiration of the Declaration of Independence, that all people are created equal, created in the image of God. And then we’ve always sought to form a more perfect union. Joe Biden: What should we give thanks for this season? Well, first let’s be thankful for democracy itself. In this last election, one that just took place, we’ve seen record numbers of Americans exercise the most sacred rights, that of the vote to register their will at the ballot box. Think about that. In the middle of a pandemic, more people voted this year than have ever voted in the history of the United States of America. Over 150 million people cast a ballot. Simply extraordinary. Many waiting in line five, six, seven, eight hours to vote. If you want to know what beats deep in the heart of America? It’s this, democracy, the right to determine our lives, our government and our leaders. The right to be heard. Joe Biden: Our democracy was tested this year. And what we learned is this, the people of this nation are up to the task. In America, we have full and fair and free elections. And then we honor the results. The people of this nation and the laws of the land won’t stand for anything else. Through the vote, the noblest instrument of non-violent protest ever conceived. We remained a new and reminded a new, that progress is possible that, we, the people,
 have the power to change, what Jefferson called the course of human events. Now, with our hearts and our hands and our voices, today, we can be better than yesterday and tomorrow, we can be still better than that day. Joe Biden: We should be thankful too, that America is a covenant, an unfolding story. We have what we need to create prosperity, opportunity and justice. Americans have grit and generosity, a capacity for greatness and reservoirs of goodness. We have what it takes. Now, we have to act. This is our moment. Ours together to write a newer, bolder, more compassionate chapter in the life of the nation. The work ahead is not going to be easy. It will not be quick. You want solutions, not shouting, reasons, not hyper-partisanship, light, not heat. You want us to hear one another again, see one another again, respect one another again. You want Democrats and Republicans, and independents to come together and work together. And that my friends is what I’m determined to do. Joe Biden: America is dream big. As hard as it may seem this Thanksgiving, we’re going to dream big again. Our future is bright. In fact, I’ve never been more optimistic about the future America than I am right now. I honest to God, believe that 21st century is going to be an American century. We’re going to build an economy that leads the world. We’re going to lead the world by the power of our example, not just the example of our power. We’re going to lead the world on climate and save this planet. We’re going to find cures for cancer and Alzheimer’s and diabetes. I promise you. We’re going to finally root out systemic racism in this country. I miss Thanksgiving and anticipation of all the Thanksgivings that come. Let’s dream again. Let’s commit ourselves to thinking not only of ourselves, but of others as well. For if we care for one another, if we open our arms rather than brandishing our fist, we can with the help of God heal. Joe Biden: And if we do, and I’m sure we can, we can claim the promised. With the promise who wrote these following words. The Lord is my strength and my shield, and with my song I give thanks to him. I give thanks now for you, for the trust you’ve placed in me. Together, we’ll lift our voices in the coming months and years. And our songs shall be of lives saved, bridges repaired, a nation made whole again. Folks from the Biden family to yours, wherever and however, you may be celebrated. We wish you a happy Thanksgiving. May God bless you and may God protect our troops. Happy Thanksgiving.
